README.md, before:

```
                                   __   _
                                  / /  (_)__  __ ____ __
                                 / /__/ / _ \/ // /\ \ /
                                /____/_/_//_/\_,_//_\_\
                                      / _ \/ _ \
                      __   _ __      _\___/_//_/ __             _
                     / /  (_) /____ | |/_/__| | / /____ __ ____(_)__ _____  __
                    / /__/ / __/ -_)>  </___/ |/ / -_) \ // __/ (_-</ __/ |/ /
                   /____/_/\__/\__/_/|_|    |___/\__/_\_\/_/ /_/___/\__/|___/

                   Copyright (c) 2019-2020, Linux on LiteX VexRiscv Developers
```
[![](https://travis-ci.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv) ![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-BSD%202--Clause-orange.svg)
> **Note:** Tested on Ubuntu 18.04.

## Intro:
In this repository, we experiment running Linux with [VexRiscv](https://github.com/SpinalHDL/VexRiscv) CPU, a 32-bits Linux Capable RISC-V CPU written in Spinal HDL. A SoC around the VexRiscv CPU is created using LiteX as the SoC builder and LiteX's cores written in Migen Python DSL (LiteDRAM, LiteEth, LiteSDCard). All the components used to create the SoC are open-source and the flexibility of Spinal HDL/Migen allow targeting easily very various FPGA devices/boards: Lattice, Altera, Xilinx, Microsemi FPGAs with SDRAM/DDR/DDR2/DDR3/DDR4 RAMs, RMII/MII/RGMII/1000BASE-X Ethernet PHYs. On Lattice ECP5 FPGAs, the [open source toolchain](https://github.com/SymbiFlow/prjtrellis) allows creating full open-source SoC with open-source cores **and** toolchain!

This project demonstrates **how high level HDLs (Spinal HDL, Migen) enable new possibilities and complement each other**. Results shown here are the results of a productive collaboration between open-source communities.


## Demo:
[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/tvvAQPzH29IsEEdmTOUTLEKeF.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/tvvAQPzH29IsEEdmTOUTLEKeF)

## Supported boards:

| Name         | FPGA Family         | FPGA device   | CPU Frequency |        RAM         |    Flash      |       Ethernet     | SDCard |
|--------------|---------------------|---------------|---------------|--------------------|---------------|--------------------|--------|
| Acorn CLE215+| Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A200T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits   1GB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   No   |
| Arty(A7)     | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A35T       |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI    | 100Mbps MII        |   No   |
| ArtyS7       | Xilinx Spartan7     | XC7S50        |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI    |         No         |   No   |
| NeTV2        | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A35T       |    100MHz     | 32-bits 512MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   | 100Mbps RMII       |   Yes  |
| Genesys2     | Xilinx Kintex7      | XC7K325T      |    125MHz     | 32-bits   1GB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes  |
| KC705        | Xilinx Kintex7      | XC7K325T      |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps GMII       |   Yes  |
| KCU105       | Xilinx KintexU      | XCKU40        |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR4 |  64MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps 1000BASE-X |   Yes  |
| ZCU104       | Xilinx ZynqU+       | XCZU7EV       |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR4 |  64MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes* |
| Nexys4DDR    | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A100T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 128MB DDR2 |  16MB QSPI*   | 100Mbps RMII       |   Yes  |
| Nexys Video  | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A200T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 512MB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RMII*      |   Yes  |
| miniSpartan6 | Xilinx Spartan6     | XC6SLX25      |     80MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |   8MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| Pipistrello  | Xilinx Spartan6     | XC6SLX45      |     83MHz     | 16-bits  64MB LPDDR|  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes* |
| XCU1525      | Xilinx Ultrascale+  | XCVU9P        |    125MHz     | 64-bits  4GB DDR4  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| Versa ECP5   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 45F  |     75MHz     | 16-bits 128MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII      |   No   |
| HADBadge     | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U-45F     |     48MHz     |  8-bits  32MB SDR  |  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   No   |
| ULX3S        | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 45F     |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |   4MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| OrangeCrab   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 25F     |     48MHz     | 16-bits 128MB SDR  |   4MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| CamLink 4K   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 25F     |     81MHz     | 16-bits 128MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| TrellisBoard | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 85F  |     75MHz     | 32-bits   1GB DDR3 |   16MB QSPI*  |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes  |
| ECPIX-5      | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 85F  |     75MHz     | 16-bits 512MB DDR3 |   16MB QSPI*  |   1Gbps RGMII      |   Yes* |
| De0Nano      | Intel Cyclone4      | EP4CE22F      |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| De10Lite     | Intel MAX10         | 10M50DA       |     50MHz     | 16-bits  64MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| De10Nano     | Intel Cyclone5      | 5CSEBA6U23I7  |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   Yes  |
| Avalanche    | Microsemi PolarFire | MPF300TS      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |   8MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   No   |
| QM T EP4CE15 | Intel Cyclone4      | EP4CE15F      |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |

> **Note:** \*=present on the board but not yet supported.

> **Note:** Avalanche support can be found in [RISC-V - Getting Started Guide](https://risc-v-getting-started-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/linux-avalanche.html) thanks to [Antmicro](https://antmicro.com).

## Prerequisites
```sh
$ sudo apt install build-essential device-tree-compiler wget git python3-setuptools
$ git clone https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv
$ cd linux-on-litex-vexriscv
```

## Pre-built Bitstreams/Linux images
Pre-built bistreams for the supported board and pre-built Linux images can be found in the [linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt) repository and allow doing
tests without the need to compile anything.

To get the pre-built bitstreams/images, clone the prebuilt repository near the linux-on-litex-vexriscv repository
and copy all the files from prebuilt directory to the linux-on-litex-vexriscv directory:
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt
$ cp -r linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt/* linux-on-litex-vexriscv
```

## Installing LiteX
```sh
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/enjoy-digital/litex/master/litex_setup.py
$ chmod +x litex_setup.py
$ ./litex_setup.py init install --user (--user to install to user directory)
```
For more information, please visit: https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/wiki/Installation

## Installing a RISC-V toolchain
```sh
$ wget https://static.dev.sifive.com/dev-tools/riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14.tar.gz
$ tar -xvf riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14.tar.gz
$ export PATH=$PATH:$PWD/riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14/bin/
```
## Installing Verilator (only needed for simulation)
```sh
$ sudo apt install verilator
$ sudo apt install libevent-dev libjson-c-dev
```
## Installing OpenOCD (only needed for hardware test)
```sh
$ sudo apt install libtool automake pkg-config libusb-1.0-0-dev
$ git clone https://github.com/ntfreak/openocd.git
$ cd openocd
$ ./bootstrap
$ ./configure --enable-ftdi
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

## Running the LiteX simulation
```sh
$ ./sim.py
```
You should see Linux booting and be able to interact with it:
```
        __   _ __      _  __
       / /  (_) /____ | |/_/
      / /__/ / __/ -_)>  <
     /____/_/\__/\__/_/|_|

 (c) Copyright 2012-2019 Enjoy-Digital
 (c) Copyright 2012-2015 M-Labs Ltd

 BIOS built on May  2 2019 18:58:54
 BIOS CRC passed (97ea247b)

--============ SoC info ================--
CPU:       VexRiscv @ 1MHz
ROM:       32KB
SRAM:      4KB
MAIN-RAM:  131072KB

--========= Peripherals init ===========--

--========== Boot sequence =============--
Booting from serial...
Press Q or ESC to abort boot completely.
sL5DdSMmkekro
Timeout
Executing booted program at 0x20000000
--============= Liftoff! ===============--
VexRiscv Machine Mode software built May  3 2019 19:33:43
--========== Booting Linux =============--
[    0.000000] No DTB passed to the kernel
[    0.000000] Linux version 5.0.9 (florent@lab) (gcc version 8.3.0 (Buildroot 2019.05-git-00938-g75f9fcd0c9)) #1 Thu May 2 17:43:30 CEST 2019
[    0.000000] Initial ramdisk at: 0x(ptrval) (8388608 bytes)
[    0.000000] Zone ranges:
[    0.000000]   Normal   [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] Movable zone start for each node
[    0.000000] Early memory node ranges
[    0.000000]   node   0: [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] Initmem setup node 0 [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] elf_hwcap is 0x1100
[    0.000000] Built 1 zonelists, mobility grouping on.  Total pages: 32512
[    0.000000] Kernel command line: mem=128M@0x40000000 rootwait console=hvc0 root=/dev/ram0 init=/sbin/init swiotlb=32
[    0.000000] Dentry cache hash table entries: 16384 (order: 4, 65536 bytes)
[    0.000000] Inode-cache hash table entries: 8192 (order: 3, 32768 bytes)
[    0.000000] Sorting __ex_table...
[    0.000000] Memory: 119052K/131072K available (1957K kernel code, 92K rwdata, 317K rodata, 104K init, 184K bss, 12020K reserved, 0K cma-reserved)
[    0.000000] SLUB: HWalign=64, Order=0-3, MinObjects=0, CPUs=1, Nodes=1
[    0.000000] NR_IRQS: 0, nr_irqs: 0, preallocated irqs: 0
[    0.000000] clocksource: riscv_clocksource: mask: 0xffffffffffffffff max_cycles: 0x114c1bade8, max_idle_ns: 440795203839 ns
[    0.000155] sched_clock: 64 bits at 75MHz, resolution 13ns, wraps every 2199023255546ns
[    0.001515] Console: colour dummy device 80x25
[    0.008297] printk: console [hvc0] enabled
[    0.009219] Calibrating delay loop (skipped), value calculated using timer frequency.. 150.00 BogoMIPS (lpj=300000)
[    0.009919] pid_max: default: 32768 minimum: 301
[    0.016255] Mount-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes)
[    0.016802] Mountpoint-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes)
[    0.044297] devtmpfs: initialized
[    0.061343] clocksource: jiffies: mask: 0xffffffff max_cycles: 0xffffffff, max_idle_ns: 7645041785100000 ns
[    0.061981] futex hash table entries: 256 (order: -1, 3072 bytes)
[    0.117611] clocksource: Switched to clocksource riscv_clocksource
[    0.251970] Unpacking initramfs...
[    2.005474] workingset: timestamp_bits=30 max_order=15 bucket_order=0
[    2.178440] Block layer SCSI generic (bsg) driver version 0.4 loaded (major 254)
[    2.178909] io scheduler mq-deadline registered
[    2.179271] io scheduler kyber registered
[    3.031140] random: get_random_bytes called from init_oops_id+0x4c/0x60 with crng_init=0
[    3.043743] Freeing unused kernel memory: 104K
[    3.044070] This architecture does not have kernel memory protection.
[    3.044472] Run /init as init process
mount: mounting tmpfs on /dev/shm failed: Invalid argument
mount: mounting tmpfs on /tmp failed: Invalid argument
mount: mounting tmpfs on /run failed: Invalid argument
Starting syslogd: OK
Starting klogd: OK
Initializing random number generator... [    4.374589] random: dd: uninitialized urandom read (512 bytes read)
done.
Starting network: ip: socket: Function not implemented
ip: socket: Function not implemented
FAIL


Welcome to Buildroot
buildroot login: root
login[48]: root login on 'hvc0'
# help
Built-in commands:
------------------
	. : [ [[ alias bg break cd chdir command continue echo eval exec
	exit export false fg getopts hash help history jobs kill let
	local printf pwd read readonly return set shift source test times
	trap true type ulimit umask unalias unset wait
#
#
```

## Running on hardware
### Build the FPGA bitstream (optional)
**The prebuilt bitstreams for the supported boards are provided**, so you can just use them for quick testing, if you want to rebuild the bitstreams you will need to install the toolchain for your FPGA:

| FPGA family       |      Toolchain        |
|-------------------|-----------------------|
| Xilinx Ultrascale |      Vivado           |
| Xilinx 7-Series   |   Vivado/SymbiFlow*   |
| Xilinx Spartan6   |        ISE            |
| Lattice ECP5      | Yosys+Trellis+Nextpnr |
| Altera Cyclone4   |    Quartus Prime      |

Once installed, build the bitstream with:
```sh
$ ./make.py --board=XXYY --build
```

### Load the FPGA bitstream
To load the bitstream to you board, run:
```sh
$ ./make.py --board=XXYY --load
```
> **Note**: If you are using a Versa board, you will need to change J50 to bypass the iSPclock. Re-arrange the jumpers to connect pins 1-2 and 3-5 (leaving one jumper spare). See p19 of the Versa Board user guide.

> **Note:** \*=to select a different toolchain use the `--toolchain` option, i.e.:
> ```
> ./make.py --board=arty --toolchain=symbiflow --build
> ```

### Load the Linux images over Serial
All the boards support Serial loading of the Linux images and this is the only way to load them when the board does not have others communications interfaces or storage capability.

To load the Linux images over Serial, use the [lxterm](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/blob/master/litex/tools/litex_term.py) terminal/tool provided by LiteX and run:
```sh
$ lxterm --images=images.json /dev/ttyUSBX --speed=1e6 --no-crc
```
The images should load and you should see Linux booting :)

> **Note**: lxterm is automatically installed with LiteX.

> **Note:** since on some boards JTAG/Serial is shared, when you will run lxterm after loading the board, the BIOS serialboot will already have timed out. You will need to press Enter, see if you have the BIOS prompt and type *reboot*.

Since loading over Serial is working for all boards, **this is the recommended way to do initial tests** even if your board has more capabilities.

### Load the Linux images over Ethernet
For boards with Ethernet support, the Linux images can be loaded over TFTP. You need to copy the files in *buildroot* directory and *emulator/emulator.bin* to your TFTP root directory. The default Local IP/Remote IP are 192.168.1.50/192.168.1.100 but you can change it with the *--local-ip* and *--remote-ip* arguments.

Once the bistream is loaded, the board you try to retrieve the files on the TFTP server. If not successful or if the boot already timed out when you see the BIOS prompt, you can retry with the *netboot* command.

The images will be loaded to RAM and you should see Linux booting :)

### Load the Linux images to SDCard
For boards with SDCard support, the Linux images can be loaded from it. You need to copy the files in *buildroot* directory and *emulator/emulator.bin* to your SDCard root directory (with a FAT partition).

The images will be loaded to RAM and you should see Linux booting :)

> **Note**: For more information about the possible ways to load application code to the CPU with LiteX, please have a look at the LiteX's [wiki](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/wiki/Load-Application-Code-To-CPU).

### Configure/Use the peripherals
Please visit the [HOWTO](https://github.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv/blob/master/HOWTO.md) document to learn how to configure and use the peripherals from Linux.

## Generating the Linux binaries (optional)
```sh
$ git clone http://github.com/buildroot/buildroot
$ cd buildroot
$ git reset --hard 88a268354daaaa6422ed875ad8c580dbaf1d81a1
$ make BR2_EXTERNAL=../linux-on-litex-vexriscv/buildroot/ litex_vexriscv_defconfig
$ make
```
The binaries are located in *output/images/*.

## Generating the VexRiscv Linux variant (optional)
Install VexRiscv requirements: https://github.com/enjoy-digital/VexRiscv-verilog#requirements

Clone the VexRiscv repository and generate the Linux variant:
```sh
$ git clone http://github.com/enjoy-digital/Vexriscv-verilog --recursive
$ sbt "runMain vexriscv.GenCoreDefault --externalInterruptArray=true --csrPluginConfig=linux-minimal"
```
The Linux variant is the *VexRiscv.v* file.

## Udev rules (optional)
Not needed but can make loading/flashing bitstreams easier:
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/litex-hub/litex-buildenv-udev
$ cd litex-buildenv-udev
$ make install
$ make reload
```

Commit message:

made modifications to documentation and rootfs files to make building custom linux and bitstream easier

README.md, after:

```
                                   __   _
                                  / /  (_)__  __ ____ __
                                 / /__/ / _ \/ // /\ \ /
                                /____/_/_//_/\_,_//_\_\
                                      / _ \/ _ \
                      __   _ __      _\___/_//_/ __             _
                     / /  (_) /____ | |/_/__| | / /____ __ ____(_)__ _____  __
                    / /__/ / __/ -_)>  </___/ |/ / -_) \ // __/ (_-</ __/ |/ /
                   /____/_/\__/\__/_/|_|    |___/\__/_\_\/_/ /_/___/\__/|___/

                   Copyright (c) 2019-2020, Linux on LiteX VexRiscv Developers
```
[![](https://travis-ci.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv) ![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-BSD%202--Clause-orange.svg)
> **Note:** Tested on Ubuntu 18.04.

**NOTE**
The HOWTO.md file end has a number of tips for building VexRiscv bitstream, building the buildroot, and putting it on a board to use.

## Intro:
In this repository, we experiment running Linux with [VexRiscv](https://github.com/SpinalHDL/VexRiscv) CPU, a 32-bits Linux Capable RISC-V CPU written in Spinal HDL. A SoC around the VexRiscv CPU is created using LiteX as the SoC builder and LiteX's cores written in Migen Python DSL (LiteDRAM, LiteEth, LiteSDCard). All the components used to create the SoC are open-source and the flexibility of Spinal HDL/Migen allow targeting easily very various FPGA devices/boards: Lattice, Altera, Xilinx, Microsemi FPGAs with SDRAM/DDR/DDR2/DDR3/DDR4 RAMs, RMII/MII/RGMII/1000BASE-X Ethernet PHYs. On Lattice ECP5 FPGAs, the [open source toolchain](https://github.com/SymbiFlow/prjtrellis) allows creating full open-source SoC with open-source cores **and** toolchain!

This project demonstrates **how high level HDLs (Spinal HDL, Migen) enable new possibilities and complement each other**. Results shown here are the results of a productive collaboration between open-source communities.


## Demo:
[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/tvvAQPzH29IsEEdmTOUTLEKeF.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/tvvAQPzH29IsEEdmTOUTLEKeF)

## Supported boards:

| Name         | FPGA Family         | FPGA device   | CPU Frequency |        RAM         |    Flash      |       Ethernet     | SDCard |
|--------------|---------------------|---------------|---------------|--------------------|---------------|--------------------|--------|
| Acorn CLE215+| Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A200T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits   1GB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   No   |
| Arty(A7)     | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A35T       |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI    | 100Mbps MII        |   No   |
| ArtyS7       | Xilinx Spartan7     | XC7S50        |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI    |         No         |   No   |
| NeTV2        | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A35T       |    100MHz     | 32-bits 512MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   | 100Mbps RMII       |   Yes  |
| Genesys2     | Xilinx Kintex7      | XC7K325T      |    125MHz     | 32-bits   1GB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes  |
| KC705        | Xilinx Kintex7      | XC7K325T      |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps GMII       |   Yes  |
| KCU105       | Xilinx KintexU      | XCKU40        |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR4 |  64MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps 1000BASE-X |   Yes  |
| ZCU104       | Xilinx ZynqU+       | XCZU7EV       |    125MHz     | 64-bits   1GB DDR4 |  64MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes* |
| Nexys4DDR    | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A100T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 128MB DDR2 |  16MB QSPI*   | 100Mbps RMII       |   Yes  |
| Nexys Video  | Xilinx Artix7       | XC7A200T      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 512MB DDR3 |  32MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RMII*      |   Yes  |
| miniSpartan6 | Xilinx Spartan6     | XC6SLX25      |     80MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |   8MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| Pipistrello  | Xilinx Spartan6     | XC6SLX45      |     83MHz     | 16-bits  64MB LPDDR|  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes* |
| XCU1525      | Xilinx Ultrascale+  | XCVU9P        |    125MHz     | 64-bits  4GB DDR4  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| Versa ECP5   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 45F  |     75MHz     | 16-bits 128MB DDR3 |  16MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII      |   No   |
| HADBadge     | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U-45F     |     48MHz     |  8-bits  32MB SDR  |  16MB QSPI*   |         No         |   No   |
| ULX3S        | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 45F     |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |   4MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| OrangeCrab   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 25F     |     48MHz     | 16-bits 128MB SDR  |   4MB QSPI*   |         No         |   Yes  |
| CamLink 4K   | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5U 25F     |     81MHz     | 16-bits 128MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| TrellisBoard | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 85F  |     75MHz     | 32-bits   1GB DDR3 |   16MB QSPI*  |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   Yes  |
| ECPIX-5      | Lattice ECP5        | LFE5UM5G 85F  |     75MHz     | 16-bits 512MB DDR3 |   16MB QSPI*  |   1Gbps RGMII      |   Yes* |
| De0Nano      | Intel Cyclone4      | EP4CE22F      |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| De10Lite     | Intel MAX10         | 10M50DA       |     50MHz     | 16-bits  64MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |
| De10Nano     | Intel Cyclone5      | 5CSEBA6U23I7  |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   Yes  |
| Avalanche    | Microsemi PolarFire | MPF300TS      |    100MHz     | 16-bits 256MB DDR3 |   8MB QSPI*   |   1Gbps RGMII*     |   No   |
| QM T EP4CE15 | Intel Cyclone4      | EP4CE15F      |     50MHz     | 16-bits  32MB SDR  |      No       |         No         |   No   |

> **Note:** \*=present on the board but not yet supported.

> **Note:** Avalanche support can be found in [RISC-V - Getting Started Guide](https://risc-v-getting-started-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/linux-avalanche.html) thanks to [Antmicro](https://antmicro.com).

## Prerequisites
```sh
$ sudo apt install build-essential device-tree-compiler wget git python3-setuptools
$ git clone https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv
$ cd linux-on-litex-vexriscv
```

## Pre-built Bitstreams/Linux images
Pre-built bistreams for the supported board and pre-built Linux images can be found in the [linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt) repository and allow doing
tests without the need to compile anything.

To get the pre-built bitstreams/images, clone the prebuilt repository near the linux-on-litex-vexriscv repository
and copy all the files from prebuilt directory to the linux-on-litex-vexriscv directory:
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/enjoy-digital/linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt
$ cp -r linux-on-litex-vexriscv-prebuilt/* linux-on-litex-vexriscv
```

## Installing LiteX
```sh
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/enjoy-digital/litex/master/litex_setup.py
$ chmod +x litex_setup.py
$ ./litex_setup.py init install --user (--user to install to user directory)
```
For more information, please visit: https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/wiki/Installation

## Installing a RISC-V toolchain
```sh
$ wget https://static.dev.sifive.com/dev-tools/riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14.tar.gz
$ tar -xvf riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14.tar.gz
$ export PATH=$PATH:$PWD/riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc-8.1.0-2019.01.0-x86_64-linux-ubuntu14/bin/
```
## Installing Verilator (only needed for simulation)
```sh
$ sudo apt install verilator
$ sudo apt install libevent-dev libjson-c-dev
```
## Installing OpenOCD (only needed for hardware test)
```sh
$ sudo apt install libtool automake pkg-config libusb-1.0-0-dev
$ git clone https://github.com/ntfreak/openocd.git
$ cd openocd
$ ./bootstrap
$ ./configure --enable-ftdi
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

## Running the LiteX simulation
```sh
$ ./sim.py
```
You should see Linux booting and be able to interact with it:
```
        __   _ __      _  __
       / /  (_) /____ | |/_/
      / /__/ / __/ -_)>  <
     /____/_/\__/\__/_/|_|

 (c) Copyright 2012-2019 Enjoy-Digital
 (c) Copyright 2012-2015 M-Labs Ltd

 BIOS built on May  2 2019 18:58:54
 BIOS CRC passed (97ea247b)

--============ SoC info ================--
CPU:       VexRiscv @ 1MHz
ROM:       32KB
SRAM:      4KB
MAIN-RAM:  131072KB

--========= Peripherals init ===========--

--========== Boot sequence =============--
Booting from serial...
Press Q or ESC to abort boot completely.
sL5DdSMmkekro
Timeout
Executing booted program at 0x20000000
--============= Liftoff! ===============--
VexRiscv Machine Mode software built May  3 2019 19:33:43
--========== Booting Linux =============--
[    0.000000] No DTB passed to the kernel
[    0.000000] Linux version 5.0.9 (florent@lab) (gcc version 8.3.0 (Buildroot 2019.05-git-00938-g75f9fcd0c9)) #1 Thu May 2 17:43:30 CEST 2019
[    0.000000] Initial ramdisk at: 0x(ptrval) (8388608 bytes)
[    0.000000] Zone ranges:
[    0.000000]   Normal   [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] Movable zone start for each node
[    0.000000] Early memory node ranges
[    0.000000]   node   0: [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] Initmem setup node 0 [mem 0x00000000c0000000-0x00000000c7ffffff]
[    0.000000] elf_hwcap is 0x1100
[    0.000000] Built 1 zonelists, mobility grouping on.  Total pages: 32512
[    0.000000] Kernel command line: mem=128M@0x40000000 rootwait console=hvc0 root=/dev/ram0 init=/sbin/init swiotlb=32
[    0.000000] Dentry cache hash table entries: 16384 (order: 4, 65536 bytes)
[    0.000000] Inode-cache hash table entries: 8192 (order: 3, 32768 bytes)
[    0.000000] Sorting __ex_table...
[    0.000000] Memory: 119052K/131072K available (1957K kernel code, 92K rwdata, 317K rodata, 104K init, 184K bss, 12020K reserved, 0K cma-reserved)
[    0.000000] SLUB: HWalign=64, Order=0-3, MinObjects=0, CPUs=1, Nodes=1
[    0.000000] NR_IRQS: 0, nr_irqs: 0, preallocated irqs: 0
[    0.000000] clocksource: riscv_clocksource: mask: 0xffffffffffffffff max_cycles: 0x114c1bade8, max_idle_ns: 440795203839 ns
[    0.000155] sched_clock: 64 bits at 75MHz, resolution 13ns, wraps every 2199023255546ns
[    0.001515] Console: colour dummy device 80x25
[    0.008297] printk: console [hvc0] enabled
[    0.009219] Calibrating delay loop (skipped), value calculated using timer frequency.. 150.00 BogoMIPS (lpj=300000)
[    0.009919] pid_max: default: 32768 minimum: 301
[    0.016255] Mount-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes)
[    0.016802] Mountpoint-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes)
[    0.044297] devtmpfs: initialized
[    0.061343] clocksource: jiffies: mask: 0xffffffff max_cycles: 0xffffffff, max_idle_ns: 7645041785100000 ns
[    0.061981] futex hash table entries: 256 (order: -1, 3072 bytes)
[    0.117611] clocksource: Switched to clocksource riscv_clocksource
[    0.251970] Unpacking initramfs...
[    2.005474] workingset: timestamp_bits=30 max_order=15 bucket_order=0
[    2.178440] Block layer SCSI generic (bsg) driver version 0.4 loaded (major 254)
[    2.178909] io scheduler mq-deadline registered
[    2.179271] io scheduler kyber registered
[    3.031140] random: get_random_bytes called from init_oops_id+0x4c/0x60 with crng_init=0
[    3.043743] Freeing unused kernel memory: 104K
[    3.044070] This architecture does not have kernel memory protection.
[    3.044472] Run /init as init process
mount: mounting tmpfs on /dev/shm failed: Invalid argument
mount: mounting tmpfs on /tmp failed: Invalid argument
mount: mounting tmpfs on /run failed: Invalid argument
Starting syslogd: OK
Starting klogd: OK
Initializing random number generator... [    4.374589] random: dd: uninitialized urandom read (512 bytes read)
done.
Starting network: ip: socket: Function not implemented
ip: socket: Function not implemented
FAIL


Welcome to Buildroot
buildroot login: root
login[48]: root login on 'hvc0'
# help
Built-in commands:
------------------
	. : [ [[ alias bg break cd chdir command continue echo eval exec
	exit export false fg getopts hash help history jobs kill let
	local printf pwd read readonly return set shift source test times
	trap true type ulimit umask unalias unset wait
#
#
```

## Running on hardware
### Build the FPGA bitstream (optional)
**The prebuilt bitstreams for the supported boards are provided**, so you can just use them for quick testing, if you want to rebuild the bitstreams you will need to install the toolchain for your FPGA:

| FPGA family       |      Toolchain        |
|-------------------|-----------------------|
| Xilinx Ultrascale |      Vivado           |
| Xilinx 7-Series   |   Vivado/SymbiFlow*   |
| Xilinx Spartan6   |        ISE            |
| Lattice ECP5      | Yosys+Trellis+Nextpnr |
| Altera Cyclone4   |    Quartus Prime      |

Once installed, build the bitstream with:
```sh
$ ./make.py --board=XXYY --build
```

### Load the FPGA bitstream
To load the bitstream to you board, run:
```sh
$ ./make.py --board=XXYY --load
```
> **Note**: If you are using a Versa board, you will need to change J50 to bypass the iSPclock. Re-arrange the jumpers to connect pins 1-2 and 3-5 (leaving one jumper spare). See p19 of the Versa Board user guide.

> **Note:** \*=to select a different toolchain use the `--toolchain` option, i.e.:
> ```
> ./make.py --board=arty --toolchain=symbiflow --build
> ```

### Load the Linux images over Serial
All the boards support Serial loading of the Linux images and this is the only way to load them when the board does not have others communications interfaces or storage capability.

To load the Linux images over Serial, use the [lxterm](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/blob/master/litex/tools/litex_term.py) terminal/tool provided by LiteX and run:
```sh
$ lxterm --images=images.json /dev/ttyUSBX --speed=1e6 --no-crc
```
The images should load and you should see Linux booting :)

> **Note**: lxterm is automatically installed with LiteX.

> **Note:** since on some boards JTAG/Serial is shared, when you will run lxterm after loading the board, the BIOS serialboot will already have timed out. You will need to press Enter, see if you have the BIOS prompt and type *reboot*.

Since loading over Serial is working for all boards, **this is the recommended way to do initial tests** even if your board has more capabilities.

### Load the Linux images over Ethernet
For boards with Ethernet support, the Linux images can be loaded over TFTP. You need to copy the files in *buildroot* directory and *emulator/emulator.bin* to your TFTP root directory. The default Local IP/Remote IP are 192.168.1.50/192.168.1.100 but you can change it with the *--local-ip* and *--remote-ip* arguments.

Once the bistream is loaded, the board you try to retrieve the files on the TFTP server. If not successful or if the boot already timed out when you see the BIOS prompt, you can retry with the *netboot* command.

The images will be loaded to RAM and you should see Linux booting :)

### Load the Linux images to SDCard
For boards with SDCard support, the Linux images can be loaded from it. You need to copy the files in *buildroot* directory and *emulator/emulator.bin* to your SDCard root directory (with a FAT partition).

The images will be loaded to RAM and you should see Linux booting :)

> **Note**: For more information about the possible ways to load application code to the CPU with LiteX, please have a look at the LiteX's [wiki](https://github.com/enjoy-digital/litex/wiki/Load-Application-Code-To-CPU).

### Configure/Use the peripherals
Please visit the [HOWTO](https://github.com/litex-hub/linux-on-litex-vexriscv/blob/master/HOWTO.md) document to learn how to configure and use the peripherals from Linux.

## Generating the Linux binaries (optional)
```sh
$ git clone http://github.com/buildroot/buildroot
$ cd buildroot
$ git reset --hard 88a268354daaaa6422ed875ad8c580dbaf1d81a1
$ make BR2_EXTERNAL=../linux-on-litex-vexriscv/buildroot/ litex_vexriscv_defconfig
$ make
```
The binaries are located in *output/images/*.

## Generating the VexRiscv Linux variant (optional)
Install VexRiscv requirements: https://github.com/enjoy-digital/VexRiscv-verilog#requirements

Clone the VexRiscv repository and generate the Linux variant:
```sh
$ git clone http://github.com/enjoy-digital/Vexriscv-verilog --recursive
$ sbt "runMain vexriscv.GenCoreDefault --externalInterruptArray=true --csrPluginConfig=linux-minimal"
```
The Linux variant is the *VexRiscv.v* file.

## Udev rules (optional)
Not needed but can make loading/flashing bitstreams easier:
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/litex-hub/litex-buildenv-udev
$ cd litex-buildenv-udev
$ make install
$ make reload
```
